HTML::WikiConverter installation
================================

HTML::WikiConverter is an HTML to wiki converter capable of converting
HTML source into a variety of wiki dialects. It's aimed at folks who
are converting vanilla HTML websites into wikis.

The HTML::WikiConverter module itself is an interface to its various
dialect modules (e.g. HTML::WikiConverter::MediaWiki). To install the
latest version of HTML::WikiConverter and all of its dialects, install
Bundle::HTMLWikiConverter from CPAN:

  % perl -MCPAN -e 'install Bundle::HTMLWikiConverter'

For just the interface:

  % perl -MCPAN -e 'install HTML::WikiConverter'

Individual dialects can be installed separately, e.g.:

  % perl -MCPAN -e 'install HTML::WikiConverter::MediaWiki'
  % perl -MCPAN -e 'install HTML::WikiConverter::UseMod'
  % perl -MCPAN -e 'install HTML::WikiConverter::Oddmuse'

Installing by hand
==================

You may also obtain the source as a .tar.gz, in which case you can run
the following after unpacking:

  % perl Makefile.PL
  % make && make test && make install

The 'make install' step attempts to install the module and the
html2wiki utility into something like /usr or /usr/local, which
probably won't work unless you're an administrator. To work around
this, you may install into your own local directory like so:

  % perl Makefile.PL PREFIX=~/myperl5
  % make && make test && make install

Installing the web application
==============================

Included in this distribution is HTML::WikiConverter::WebApp, which is
a CGI::Application-based web application that interfaces with
HTML::WikiConverter and any installed dialects. (Note that you will
need to have CGI::Application installed to use this feature.)

The H::WC::WebApp module is installed automatically. The remaining
files necessary for the web application are in the cgi/ directory. To
install these files, first follow the basic installation instructions
above. Next, copy the cgi/ directory to your cgi-bin/ directory,
provide a suitable value for the 'template_path' variable in the
provided index.cgi instance script, and assign appropriate
permissions.

These steps can all be accomplished via the included webapp-install
script, which is excuted like so:

  % ./webapp-install

When complete, be sure to stop and restart your Apache server:

  % sudo apachectl stop
  % sudo apachectl start

If the webapp-install script does not work or you choose not to use
it, you may also install the web application by hand. (This is
essentially what the webapp-install script does.)

1) Copy the cgi/ directory to your cgi-bin/ directory:

  % cp -r cgi /var/www/cgi-bin/html2wiki

2) Assign appropriate permissions:

  % chmod 655 /var/www/cgi-bin/html2wiki/index.cgi
  % chmod a+r /var/www/cgi-bin/html2wiki/templates/*

3) Edit the index.cgi instance script to provide a suitable template
path, replacing __PATH_TO_TEMPLATES__ with the location of the
cgi/templates/ folder:

  # Inside /var/www/cgi-bin/html2wiki/index.cgi:
  my %config = (
    template_path => '/var/www/cgi-bin/html2wiki/templates',
  );

4) Restart your Apache server as appropriate.

5) The template filler should then be available via a standard URL:

  http://www.yourhost.com/cgi-bin/html2wiki/index.cgi

Author
======

David J. Iberri <diberri@cpan.org>
